Hi friends
In this video we are going to learn about while
loop
So while loop can be used in situations where we
don't know the exact number of iterations here the number
of iterations actually depend on the input
For an example let's say we get an input and we
have a block of code and we want to execute
this block of code until the input value divided by
two becomes one
So if the input is 2, the block will execute one
time since two by two equals to one Now if
the input is 8, then the block of code will execute
3 times since 8/2 gives 4
4/2 gives 2 and 2/2 gives 1
So here the number of iterations depend on the value
of input
So there is this undeterminism and in such cases
we cannot use for loop
Now see the syntax of while loop. while(condition) and
in braces write the statements and now about the working
of while loop The working is very simple
As long as the condition is true these statements inside
while will be executed and the moment the condition becomes
false the control comes out of while loop so see this
Example
Here we have a variable initialisation and then we have
the while loop where we have
Some statements including increment/decrement the variable
So first this initialisation will be done and this
condition will be checked and suppose it is satisfied or true
the inner statements will be executed including the increment/ decrement
So that is done
And now the first iteration is completed
Now it goes and check the while condition again and
let's say it is still returning
A true. It will go inside again and execute the
statements inside and the second iteration is also completed
So again while condition is checked and suppose now it
return false
Now the control comes out of the while loop and Execute
the remaining statements
So basically while loop will execute this block inside
as long as the condition is true
Now see the sample programme where we get an integer
number from the user and display how many times
it can be divided by two until it becomes 1
We have the main function and we're declaring 2
integer variables num and count and initialise  to 0 Now we ask
the user to enter number and that is stored in variable
Num. Let's suppose it was 20
And now we have this while loop here
Remember the working of while loop
As long as the condition is true, the statements inside
while will be executed
So here the condition is num greater than 1
And what is num? 20. And 20 greater than 1
so condition is true
So we enter the while loop and there we increment
count so it will become 1
And then we have num equal to num
Right Shift one which is equivalent to num by two
In C. so num becomes 10 and first iteration is completed
and after each iteration we have to check the condition
here num equal to 10 which is greater than one
So condition is true and we go inside and increment
count
So count becomes 2
And right shift num will give the value five and
it will be stored in num and second iteration is
also completed again
We go and check the condition. num equal to five
which is greater than one
So condition is true
So increment count and it becomes 3
And now num = num/2 that is 2
and third iteration is also completed
Now we check the condition again and we have num
equal to 2 which is greater than one. Again the
condition is true.
So we increment count and count becomes 4 now right
shift num 2/2 = 1 which will
be stored in num and fourth iteration is also completed
So check the condition again num equal to one which
is not greater than one
So the condition is failed and it comes out of
the while loop and execute the next statement which is
printing the value of count
And here count = 4 which will be printed
So that's all and thank you for watching this video